# Behavioral and Transcriptomic Analyses of _mecp2_ Function in Zebrafish

<h3 align="right">Nicholas J. Santistevan, Colby T. Ford, Cole S. Gilsdorf, and Yevgenya Grinblat.</h3>

## Abstract

Rett Syndrome (RTT), a human neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by severe cognitive and motor impairments, is caused by dysfunction of the transcriptional regulator _Methyl-CpG-binding protein 2_ (MECP2). MeCP2 is deeply conserved across vertebrates and animal modeling has been essential for deciphering the mechanism of its function. The bulk of this work has been done in mouse _Mecp2_ mutants, which share key features of RTT, namely, impaired synaptic physiology, and motor and cognitive deficits; these include limited mobility, decreased cognition, and sensory filtering deficits. In contrast, loss of mecp2 function in zebrafish results in milder behavioral alterations and fewer developmental abnormalities, suggesting that the function of MeCP2 may differ between zebrafish and mammals, highlighting the importance of studying MeCP2 in different model organisms to gain a comprehensive understanding of its role in neurodevelopment and behavior.

We asked if key mammalian functions of MeCP2 are conserved in zebrafish using a two-pronged approach that combined behavioral assays and transcriptomic analysis. First, we quantified baseline activity levels, stimulus-evoked motor responses, and sensory filtering in zebrafish _mecp2_ mutants at 5 dpf, when these behaviors are robustly established. This analysis revealed a previously unknown role for mecp2 in the visually guided dark- and light-flash responses, and established that mecp2 function is not required for gross movement, acoustic startle response, or measures of sensory filtering, including habituation and sensorimotor gating. In contrast, RNA-Seq transcriptome analysis showed that zebrafish mecp2 controls transcription of a large gene set, and pathway analysis identified several key pathways that require MeCP2 function in zebrafish and in mammals, revealing deep conservation of molecular pathways controlled by the function of MeCP2. Taken together, these data support analysis of mecp2 depletion on larval zebrafish behavior and will inform future studies.**
